# Using multiple computer-predicted structures as molecular replacement models: application to the antiviral mini-protein LCB2


## Abstract
  A set of crystallographic structures has been obtained for the small antiviral protein LCB2 using molecular replacement models from six different structure-prediction programs. This set of structures can be interpreted as a multiconformer ensemble, improving quality metrics and offering an interesting insight into side-chain dynamics.


## Introduction
  At the present time, 74% of all crystallographic protein structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) have been solved using the molecular replacement (MR) technique. Traditionally, MR models have been obtained using crystallographic structures of homologous proteins. It has been customary to edit such homology models. The editing may involve partial or complete removal of side chains, as well as removal of loops that have low sequence similarity to the target or appear conformationally disordered (as deduced from consideration of multiple search models) (Evans & McCoy, 2008 ▸; Abergel, 2013 ▸). More sophisticated search models have also been employed, such as ensemble models (Kleywegt & Jones, 1996 ▸) or models adjusted to account for domain dynamics in multidomain proteins (Suhre & Sanejouand, 2004 ▸).

  Over time, crystallographers started using specialized modeling programs to improve on homology templates. The first such example in the PDB was 1qnw (Loris et al., 2000 ▸), which was solved with the help of the homology modeling tool SWISS-MODEL (Guex & Peitsch, 1997 ▸). Soon thereafter the structure 1qym was reported (Manjasetty et al., 2004 ▸), where the MR model was based not on a single homology template, but rather on several templates automatically selected by SWISS-MODEL. At about the same time the structure 1row (Schormann et al., 2004 ▸) was solved using the homology template prepared by MODELLER (Šali & Blundell, 1993 ▸). The option of using MODELLER to improve on homology templates has also been offered by the CaspR server (Claude et al., 2004 ▸).

  It should be noted, however, that initially the attempts to use modeling programs to improve on homology templates met with only very limited success. Special tests to investigate this matter have been conducted as a part of the biannual Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) competition. The first such test under the ‘model refinement’ category showed that only a small fraction of all treated templates were actually improved, and even then the improvement was mostly marginal (MacCallum et al., 2009 ▸). Over the next decade there was some progress in this area, but the results still left much to be desired (Read et al., 2019 ▸). Because of the recent successes in ab initio structure predictions (see below), this CASP category has been discontinued (Millán et al., 2021 ▸).

  While homology-based predictors rely on the information from a limited number of homologous structures, ab initio predictors (also known as de novo predictors) make use of a generalized knowledge of the principles of protein architecture that is derived from a large body of structural data, such as the entire PDB repository. It should be noted that the boundary between homology-based and ab initio predictors is blurred: many predictors that have their roots in homology modeling have evolved into more general instruments utilizing large amounts of structural information. One of the early leaders in the field of ab initio structure prediction was Rosetta; over time this program has gone through a number of transformative changes (Das & Baker, 2008 ▸; Yang et al., 2020 ▸; Watson et al., 2023 ▸). Using Rosetta, Baker and co-workers first demonstrated that an ab initio protein model can successfully be used as an MR model (Qian et al., 2007 ▸). A number of studies followed, where ab initio MR models were tested for dozens and even hundreds of crystallographic datasets (Rigden et al., 2008 ▸; Das & Baker, 2009 ▸; Rämisch et al., 2015 ▸); a special platform, AMPLE, was developed to support such applications (Bibby et al., 2012 ▸; Keegan et al., 2015 ▸; Simpkin et al., 2019 ▸). New crystallographic structures solved with the help of Rosetta-generated ab initio MR models started to emerge as well (Sun et al., 2018 ▸; Takekawa et al., 2019 ▸).

  Three years ago, the highly accurate neural-network-based predictor AlphaFold2 took the field by storm (Jumper et al., 2021 ▸). Tests have shown that AlphaFold2 can generate MR models with a success rate of ca 90% (Millán et al., 2021 ▸; McCoy et al., 2022 ▸; Pereira et al., 2021 ▸; Terwilliger et al., 2023 ▸). Two very recent studies found that as many as 92% of the structures that were originally determined using single-wavelength anomalous diffraction can successfully be solved by means of the (appropriately edited) MR models by AlphaFold2 (Keegan et al., 2024 ▸; Wang et al., 2025 ▸). Taking advantage of this new opportunity, a number of structures have been solved using diffraction datasets that defied previous structure-solving efforts (Kryshtafovych et al., 2021 ▸; Barbarin-Bocahu & Graille, 2022 ▸). Not surprisingly, the number of structures determined with the help of MR models from AlphaFold2 has grown dramatically in recent years. By early summer 2023, the PDB contained 224 identifiable structures that have been solved in this manner. Only a year later we found 911 such structures. As of this day the number has reached 2142 (this includes the structures solved with the help of AlphaFold3). The actual number is probably even higher because some depositors indicate that MR models have been generated in silico without providing any further details.

  Other programs strive to replicate this success. In particular, RoseTTAFold has similar capabilities to AlphaFold2 and also led to a number of de novo protein structures (Baek et al., 2021 ▸). New technologies have also been incorporated into the recently released D-I-TASSER and D-QUARK servers (Zheng et al., 2021 ▸; Zheng et al., 2023 ▸). ESMFold employs an algorithm which is nearly as accurate as AlphaFold2, but computationally is much faster (Lin et al., 2023 ▸). MultiFOLD and its companion programs bring to the table the ability to model protein assemblies (McGuffin et al., 2023 ▸). Finally, the arrival of AlphaFold3 sets a new benchmark in this rapidly progressing field (Abramson et al., 2024 ▸). Methodological studies in the area of protein structure prediction also continue at a rapid pace (Huang et al., 2023 ▸).

  In this communication we take an approach that is somewhat different from most tests of computer-generated MR models. Specifically, instead of testing a single predictor across a set of crystallographic structures, we have tested a number of predictors on a single structure. The structure is that of a small (58 residues) engineered protein, LCB2, which was developed in Baker’s laboratory as a blocking ligand of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Cao et al., 2020 ▸). It was envisioned that solutions of mini-proteins such as LCB2 could be used in the form of a nasal spray to confer temporary protection against the coronavirus infection. Two of the higher-affinity mini-proteins, LCB1 and AHB2, saw further development, proving their effectiveness in animal models (Case et al., 2021 ▸; Hunt et al., 2022 ▸). While LCB2 was validated by means of biolayer interferometry experiments and tested in cell culture assays employing live virus, it has not been developed further.

  We have found that the original design model of LCB2 (in complex with the receptor-binding domain of the viral spike protein) (Cao et al., 2020 ▸) offers a bona fide MR model to solve the crystallographic structure. This is not surprising since there is a fairly long history of Rosetta design models being successfully used as MR models in crystallographic studies (Chen et al., 2019 ▸; Boyken et al., 2019 ▸). Furthermore, all-helical proteins, such as LCB2, are known to be best suited for this type of application (Bibby et al., 2012 ▸). In addition, we have also obtained successful MR models from AlphaFold3, AlphaFold2, MultiFOLD, RoseTTAFold and trRosetta (Du et al., 2021 ▸). A few other predictors did not reach the level of accuracy that is required of an MR model.

  We performed the process of structure determination beginning with each of the six productive computer-predicted MR models. For each starting model the procedure was performed independently using the standard iterative protocol involving Coot (Emsley et al., 2010 ▸) and Phenix (Liebschner et al., 2019 ▸). While the initial models showed appreciable variability (up to 0.87 Å) and differed substantially from the final coordinates (up to 1.08 Å), the structure determination process fully converged, resulting in six refined models within 0.25 Å from each other. This kind of precision can be expected for a diffraction dataset with 2.1 Å resolution, as acquired in our study.

  The idea of screening of multiple candidate MR models (search models) is well established in protein crystallography (Keegan & Winn, 2007 ▸; Stokes-Rees & Sliz, 2010 ▸). The purpose of such a screening procedure is normally to discover one usable MR model leading to the unique correct solution. In this study we adopted a somewhat different perspective. We employed six productive MR models to arrive at an ensemble of six distinct final structures, which are very similar yet not identical. It turns out that the differences are not limited to small atom displacements – some of the differences are more significant. In particular, a number of surface side chains were solved with different conformations.

  Interestingly, for each of the individual structures the electron density for a given side chain is consistent with a single rotameric state – and offers no evidence (or little evidence) of conformational heterogeneity. However, when we compare the structures obtained from different MR models, we observe the presence of multiple side-chain conformations. Strictly speaking, this is an example of model bias whereby the final solution is dependent on a prior model. The biased character of the solutions (in terms of the side-chain conformations for several specific residues) was confirmed by inspection of the OMIT maps (Liebschner et al., 2017 ▸).

  Traditionally, model bias is considered to be a crystallographer’s enemy (Hodel et al., 1992 ▸). However, here we argue that model bias can also be a crystallographer’s friend. Specifically, when we use a model where the side-chain conformation corresponds to one of the rotameric states that is significantly populated in the actual crystal, we thereby ‘tease out’ the electron density for this particular conformation. When we use several relevant models, we therefore recover the conformational ensemble of the side chain in question. Indeed, treating the collection of six LCB2 structures as a multiconformer ensemble, we observe a significant drop in Rwork and Rfree values compared with the individual structures. The conformational disorder at the sites of interest was also confirmed by a series of crystal MD simulations.


## Materials and methods
  Details of LCB2 expression and purification, functional assay using isothermal titration calorimetry, protein crystallization, diffraction data collection and processing, principal component analyses and MD modeling are provided as a part of the supporting information.


### MR models
  AlphaFold3. The web server https://www.alphafoldserver.com was used to generate ab initio models of LCB2 (web addresses of structure-prediction servers employed in this study are summarized in Table S3). Five models were manufactured, which is the default output for this server. The protein sequence was the same as employed in our crystallographic study (see the supporting information). Note that AlphaFold3 was trained on the PDB structures released before 30 September 2021 and therefore has not seen our crystallographic structure 8c3e. The models, which do not include hydrogen atoms, contain predicted local distance difference test (pLDDT) scores (Mariani et al., 2013 ▸) placed in the field that is normally reserved for B factors. To further process the models, we have used three different protocols:

  (i) Conversion of pLDDT scores to B factors using phenix.process_predicted_model (Oeffner et al., 2022 ▸); in doing so, several atoms with lower confidence scores, pLDDT < 70, were deleted according to the default setting ‘remove low-confidence residues’: Ser2 Oγ, Lys29 Nζ, Arg41 Nη1 and Arg41 Nη2, Arg49 Nη1 and Arg49 Nη2, Arg52 Nη1 and Lys56 Nζ.

  (ii) Generation of B factors based on the degree of solvent exposure of the individual atoms in the model using phenix.sculptor (Bunkóczi & Read, 2011b ▸).

  (iii) Assignment of the same constant value to all atomic B factors using phenix.sculptor (e.g. 10 or 20, the specific value does not matter for the subsequent phenix.phaser treatment).

  In this manner, we produced 15 starting models, which differed from each other by atomic coordinates and/or B-factor values. All of these models were processed by phenix.phaser (McCoy et al., 2007 ▸). In doing so, we indicated that the expected number of protein molecules in the asymmetric unit was 2 (although in reality there is only 1 protein molecule per asymmetric unit). This proved to be a helpful initial guess because it effectively accounts for the presence of ca 50% twinning in our crystal and thus provides the program with a better initial estimate of the σA function (McCoy, 2017 ▸). Starting with this estimate, phenix.phaser consistently arrived at superior solutions characterized by higher log-likelihood gain (LLG) scores and translation function Z-scores (TFZ scores). Appropriately, these solutions featured a single protein molecule in the asymmetric unit. The complete list of 15 AlphaFold3-derived models with their respective LLG and TFZ scores is given in Table S4. From this list we selected the model with the highest scores, see Table 1 ▸, and used it as a starting point to solve the structure via the standard Phenix- and Coot-based procedure.

  AlphaFold2. AlphaFold2 version 2.3.2 was accessed through the official Colab Notebook, see Table S3. A single ab initio model of LCB2 was generated, which is the default output for this server. The model originally included hydrogen atoms, which were deleted prior to phenix.phaser treatment. Using three different protocols to assign B factors, we arrived at three MR models containing residues 1 to 58 and a full complement of atoms. The best of these models, see Table 1 ▸, was used to solve the structure of LCB2. In this particular case, the process of the structure determination was performed twice, resulting in a pair of very similar, but not identical, structures.

  MultiFOLD. Five ab initio models of LCB2 were generated using the designated web server, see Table S3. The models originally included hydrogen atoms, which were deleted prior to phenix.phaser treatment. When processing the models with phenix.process_predicted_model, two N-terminal residues (Gly–Ser) were deleted according to the default setting ‘remove low-confidence residues’.

  Rosetta. The Rosetta model was from the archive included in the supporting information of the paper by Cao et al. (2020 ▸). The model is a complex of the receptor-binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with LCB2 (whose original sequence does not include the N-terminal Gly–Ser residues). All B factors were originally assigned zero values. Prior to processing with phenix.phaser, the spike protein was removed from the model and the hydrogen atoms were deleted. Since pLDDT scores were not available for this particular Rosetta model, the B factors were either calculated based on accessible surface, option (ii), or all assigned the same constant value, option (iii). The better of the two resulting models was chosen for the role of the MR model.

  RoseTTAFold. Five ab initio models of LCB2 were generated using the designated web server, see Table S3. The models included estimated uncertainties (root-mean-square deviations) of the atomic coordinates, calculated internally by RoseTTAFold based on pLDDT scores (Oeffner et al., 2022 ▸). These values were converted to B factors using the relevant option in the program phenix.process_predicted_model. The same program also deleted four N-terminal residues (Gly–Ser–Ser–Asp) and one C-terminal residue (Leu), which were classified as low-confidence regions, RMSD > 1.5 Å. Out of 15 distinct models with different atomic coordinates and/or B factors, the best one was used for Coot- and Phenix-assisted structure determination.

  trRosetta. Five ab initio models of LCB2 were generated using the designated web server, see Table S3. The models were missing all arginine Nη1 and Nη2 atoms as well as tyrosine Oη atoms, and were used as such without any attempts to rebuild these atoms. B factors were assigned using options (i), (ii) and (iii), resulting in 15 distinct models, of which one model with the highest LLG and TFZ scores was chosen for further structure determination.

  Similar schemes were also used for the QUARK, Phyre2, I-TASSER and SWISS-MODEL predictors. None of these methods led to productive MR models; therefore, we do not provide any further details on these efforts. The more recently released versions D-I-TASSER and D-QUARK were unsuit­able for the purpose of this study because these programs are familiar with our crystallographic structure 8c3e. We also tested the recent predictor ESMFold, but found that its predicted model was very similar to the one generated by MultiFOLD; therefore we did not include it in subsequent analyses.

  The refinement statistics shown in this paper are from phenix.refine (Afonine et al., 2012 ▸). In the case of ensemble interpretation, phenix.refine-reported model structure factors from the six final structures of LCB2 were averaged prior to calculation of Rwork and Rfree. In order to compare different MR models with each other and with the final structures, we defined the set of atoms shared by all of these models (structures). This ‘consensus set’ includes residues from 5 to 57, leaving out all Nη1 and Nη2 arginine atoms and all Oη tyrosine atoms, as well as Nζ atoms from residues Lys29 and Lys56. All structural superpositions were generated using the final structure derived from the AlphaFold3 model as a reference.


## Results

### Structure overview
  Table 1 ▸ summarizes the information about the computer-predicted models that were tested as potential MR models to solve the crystallographic structure of LCB2. As detailed in Materials and methods, almost all predictors generate multiple models (typically, five models) in response to a service request involving the amino-acid sequence of a target protein. For all these models, we used three different methods of assigning atomic B factors: based on accessible surface area (ASA) values, based on pLDDT scores (where the atoms with particularly poor scores were removed) or using a single constant value. All of the obtained variants were assessed by means of phenix.phaser, and one best model for each predictor was selected for further analyses. As usual, we have used LLG and TFZ scores as quality metrics (Read & McCoy, 2016 ▸; Bunkóczi et al., 2013 ▸). A complete summary of the phenix.phaser trials is given in Table S4, whereas the best models for all predictors are listed in Table 1 ▸.

  One lesson that we learned from this exercise is that ASA-based assignment of B factors and pLDDT-based assignment of B factors lead to comparable results, whereas using uniform B factors is clearly less efficient (see Table S4). This means that pLDDT scores are not necessary to prepare a state-of-the-art MR model, since the long-known ASA-based approach provides a convenient alternative.

  Inspection of LLG and TFZ scores in Table 1 ▸ immediately suggests that six predictors have produced successful MR models: AlphaFold3, AlphaFold2, MultiFOLD, Rosetta, RoseTTAFold and trRosetta. At the same time, four of the older programs, QUARK, Phyre2, I-TASSER and SWISS-MODEL, apparently fell short (with a typical TFZ score of 5, these models are unlikely to produce a viable solution). Indeed, our efforts to solve a structure were successful with the former six MR models, but unsuccessful with the latter four.

  In addition to the single best AlphaFold3 model (LLG = 213, TFZ = 16), we also considered an ensemble comprised of five AlphaFold3 models. In our tests using phenix.ensembler and phenix.phaser, this ensemble produced somewhat improved scores (LLG = 227, TFZ = 17). Apparently, the set of models generated by AlphaFold3 to some degree captures the conformational variability of LCB2 (Bunkóczi & Read, 2011a ▸). One may expect that in certain borderline situations use of the computer-predicted ensembles (subject to trimming as needed) may tip the scales, leading to successful structure determination.

  Turning to the usage statistics for computer-predicted MR models (the fourth column in Table 1 ▸), we observe that AlphaFold2 followed by AlphaFold3 have enjoyed great success as sources of workable MR models. Our results suggest, however, that other predictors, both preceding AlphaFold2 (e.g.Rosetta) and building on AlphaFold2 technology (e.g.MultiFOLD), can also produce bona fide MR models. This situation creates an opportunity for comparative analyses of LCB2 structures derived from different computer-predicted MR models.

  Listed in Table 2 ▸ are the refinement statistics for LCB2 structures obtained from the MR models by six different predictors. The structures are characterized by Rwork of 0.21 and Rfree of 0.24–0.25, typical of a crystallographic resolution of 2.10 Å. Local geometry measures, such as Ramachandran and rotamer outliers, clash scores and other metrics that are conveniently summarized in the MolProbity scores (Williams et al., 2018 ▸), are very good, reflecting the high quality of the automated refinement using phenix.refine (Afonine et al., 2012 ▸). All structures include residues from 4 to 58, with no alternative conformations; they also include from 1 to 4 glycerol molecules and between 18 and 24 water molecules. Based on these standard statistics it is hardly possible to rank the structures and identify the best (most accurate) set of coordinates. Instead, we argue that all of the structures are equally valid and one cannot be chosen over the other (as discussed further in this paper).

  Shown in Figs. 1 ▸(a)–1(f) are pairwise superpositions of the initial computer-predicted MR models and their descendant crystallographic structures. In all of these pairs we observe distinct differences in the conformation of the short loop connecting the second and third helices (residues 42–44). In addition, we observe that in the RoseTTAFold and trRosetta model the third helix is significantly shifted from its true (i.e. experimentally determined) position. The shift amounts to ca 2 Å in the case of the RoseTTAFold model and a little less than that for the trRosetta model, see Fig. 1 ▸(e) and Fig. 1 ▸(f).

  The situation with the loop 42–44 led us to suggest that its conformation in the crystallographic structure is influenced by a crystal contact. Indeed, it turns out that residue Asn43 at the center of the loop forms an intermolecular side-chain-to-backbone hydrogen bond with the amide group of residue Glu46 in the symmetry-related protein molecule. This hydrogen bond apparently leads to stretching out of the loop (Rapp & Pollack, 2005 ▸), thus causing the difference between the computer-generated model and the actual structure, see Fig. 1 ▸(g). Apparently, we see an example of the situation where both the computer-predicted MR model and its related crystallographic structure are correct – yet they differ from each other because computer-prediction algorithms are agnostic of crystal contacts, whereas the experimental structures are (to some degree) sensitive to crystal contacts.

  While the MR models show some differences from the final structures, the latter are characterized by near-identical backbone folds. The bundle in Fig. 1 ▸(h) shows a superposition of six structures colored according to the MR models that were used to solve these structures. All structures superimpose almost perfectly, with slight deviations observed only at the N-terminal residues 4–5. This picture indicates that the process of structure determination is well converged and, in a global sense, the final structures are free from any significant model bias.

  Although the six final structures are nearly identical with respect to their backbone folds, the side chains are not as well defined. Shown in Fig. 1 ▸(i) is the bundle of six superimposed final structures, where the focus is on the side chains. While the majority of side chains are nicely reproduced across the entire set of structures, some others have been solved in different conformations. The origins of these differences are discussed later in this paper.

  The differences between the initial MR models and the final structures can be conveniently quantified via pairwise root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the atomic coordinates. The RMSD values for all non-hydrogen atoms are summarized in the form of a heat map in Fig. 2 ▸. Considering the initial models (upper left quadrant in Fig. 2 ▸), we observe that some of the models are quite similar to each other, e.g. the AlphaFold2 and MultiFOLD models are within 0.18 Å of each other, which reflects the genetic connection between the two programs. On the other hand, the RoseTTAFold and trRosetta models form a sort of cluster, which is appreciably different from the remaining four models, with RMSD values up to 0.87 Å. This is obviously related to the shift in the relative position of the helices, as visualized in Figs. 1 ▸(a)–1(f).

  At the same time, the MR models are visibly different from the final structures (cf. the upper right quadrant or, equivalently, lower left quadrant in Fig. 2 ▸). For the AlphaFold3, AlphaFold2, MultiFOLD and Rosetta models, this difference amounts to ca 0.7 Å. This deviation is in part attributable to the conformation of the loop 42–44, see Figs. 1 ▸(a)–1(f). For the trRosetta and especially RoseTTAFold models the deviations are larger, up to 1.08 Å, due to the shift in the relative positions of the α-helices. In general terms, however, deviations on the scale of 1.08 Å or less are considered to be modest and correspond to high-quality MR models (Oeffner et al., 2013 ▸). This is consistent with our initial assessment of the MR models using LLG and TFZ scores and is ultimately confirmed by the success of the structure determination procedure.

  Importantly, all of the final structures are nearly identical, with all-atom RMSDs in the range 0.10–0.25 Å (lower right quadrant in Fig. 2 ▸). These numbers provide a measure of uncertainty for the LCB2 coordinates, i.e. characterize the precision of the structure obtained here at 2.1 Å resolution. How does this precision compare with what is reported in the literature or found in the PDB? Historically, there has been some conflicting evidence regarding the convergence of X-ray structure determination and precision of crystallographic protein structures (Daopin et al., 1994 ▸; Ohlendorf, 1994 ▸). However, more recently it has been shown that structures of globular proteins can indeed be solved to a very high precision (Liebschner et al., 2013 ▸).

  As one relevant example, consider three structures of the well known model protein ubiquitin, 1ubq (Vijay-Kumar et al., 1987 ▸), 1ubi (Ramage et al., 1994 ▸) and 4xof (Ma et al., 2015 ▸). The structures were solved independently in the space group P212121 with crystallographic resolutions of 1.80, 1.80 and 1.15 Å, respectively. Considering the well-structured body of ubiquitin, residues 2–72, we find that pairwise all-atom RMSD values for these three structures fall in the range 0.11–0.20 Å. This is similar to what we found for our LCB2 structures. This is also in line with various empirical estimates of structure accuracy, such as the Luzzati plot (Luzzati, 1952 ▸), the σA plot (Read, 1986 ▸), Cruickshank’s DPI (Cruickshank, 1999 ▸) and others, which assume that crystallographic structures are affected by random errors obeying a normal distribution. As a cautionary note, the presence of divalent ions in the same orthorhombic ubiquitin crystals as discussed above immediately increases the RMSD values to a level of ca 0.5 Å (Bang et al., 2005 ▸; Ma et al., 2015 ▸). Likewise, proteins crystallized in different space groups or with different ligands, as well as proteins carrying point mutations or post-translationally modified residues, often differ by 0.5–1.0 Å or more (Burra et al., 2009 ▸). In addition, when crystallographic structures are modeled using conformational ensembles (as opposed to the traditional single-model representation), the coordinate variance within such ensembles tends to be larger than the 0.10–0.25 Å observed in this study (Zoete et al., 2002 ▸; DePristo et al., 2004 ▸).

  In addition to RMSD, we also used two other metrics to quantify the structural differences between the MR models and their descendant structures: global distance test – high accuracy (GDT-HA) and the local distance difference test (LDDT). The former quantity provides a better measure of overall structural similarity (de-emphasizing local deviations in the loop or termini regions), while the latter focuses on local similarities (de-emphasizing more global variations that may, for instance, arise from relative positioning of domains in a multidomain protein) (Olechnovič et al., 2019 ▸). The results are shown in Fig. S2, corroborating the discussion of the RMSD map above.

  Finally, it is convenient to visualize the convergence of the structure determination procedure using principal component analysis (PCA) (Jolliffe, 2002 ▸). In applying this method, a special coordinate frame is employed where each of the 12 analyzed models is represented by a set of coordinates {PC1, PC2, PC3, …, PC11} such that PC1 represents the most variation and PC2 represents the second most variation in the structural data. Hence, a PC1–PC2 map puts on display the most significant differences between the structures (see the supporting information for a complete description of the method).

  Shown in Fig. 3 ▸ is a PC1–PC2 map containing six computer-generated MR models of LCB2 (solid circles) and six final structures (open circles). The identities of the models and structures are color coded as indicated in the legend, and the related models and structures are connected by arrow lines. It is immediately obvious from the plot that the MR models are sufficiently diverse and far removed from the final structures, whereas the final structures are tightly clustered, i.e. nearly identical. The plot nicely illustrates the convergence of the structure determination procedure as implemented in this study.

  Of note, the PCA method allows one to visualize structural changes associated with PC1 and, separately, with PC2 (see the supporting information for additional information). Making use of this option, we determined that PC1 represents a mixture of the two modes: conformational change in the loop 42–44 and the positional shift of the third α-helix. Independently, the shift of the third helix is also parameterized by PC2. We further found that the combination of PC1 and PC2 fully captures the backbone variations shown in Figs. 1 ▸(a)–1(f).


### Conformational dynamics
  While the backbone of LCB2 is almost perfectly reproduced from one solution to another, see Fig. 1 ▸(h), the situation with the side chains is more nuanced. While most of side chains are likewise reproduced, some of them are solved with different conformations, see Fig. 1 ▸(i). As one such example consider the side chain Glu53 illustrated in Fig. 4 ▸. In the structures derived from the AlphaFold3, AlphaFold2 and RoseTTAFold models, this side chain adopts the conformational state tt 0° according to the classification by Lovell and co-workers (Lovell et al., 2000 ▸). This particular glutamate conformation is rather common in the PDB (specifically, in α-helices its estimated frequency of occurrence is 25%); in the structures at hand it is additionally stabilized by ionic interaction with the nearby Arg57 side chain. In contrast, in the structures derived from the MultiFOLD and trRosetta models, the Glu53 side chain is found in a different conformational state, mm-40° (frequency of occurrence in α-helices 19%), which is stabilized by apparent ionic interactions to Arg52 and Lys56. Finally, the structure descendent from the Rosetta model features Glu53 in yet another conformational state, mt-10° (frequency of occurrence in α-helices 36%).

  Let us summarize some observations regarding the Glu53 side chain as shown in Fig. 4 ▸. The weak electron density and elevated B factors suggest that the Glu53 side chain undergoes conformational dynamics. For this side chain our structure calculations lead to three different rotameric states, all of them clearly visible in the 2mFo − DFc map plotted at the 1σ level. In all cases but one (the Rosetta-based structure) the electron density does not offer any evidence of alternative conformations. Our attempts to model the Glu53 side chain using alternative conformations were unconvincing.

  Strictly speaking, the results shown in Fig. 4 ▸ constitute an example of model bias, i.e. the situation where the final solution depends on a prior model. To further explore this point, we compiled a set of OMIT maps focused on the Glu53 residue. Specifically, we took the six refined LCB2 structures, deleted their Glu53 side chains, and used the resulting constructs to generate electron density maps. It turned out that these OMIT maps showed essentially no observable density for the Glu53 side chain, thus confirming the notion of model bias (see Fig. S5).

  Traditionally, the effect of model bias in protein crystallography is viewed in a purely negative light, as a potential source of structural error. In this particular case, however, we argue that model bias can be seen from a different angle. We suggest that the Glu53 side chain is conformationally labile with several substantially populated conformational states. Assume for a moment that we have obtained a (highly refined) LCB2 model where the Glu53 side chain happens to reproduce one of these populated states. Using such a (faithful) model allows us to ‘tease out’ the electron density corresponding to this particular populated rotamer. Therefore, we argue that the results in Fig. 4 ▸ represent the actual Glu53 rotamers that are significantly populated in the LCB2 crystal.

  This kind of logic leads us to further suggest that LCB2 models with incorrect Glu53 side-chain conformations (i.e.the ones that correspond to unpopulated or minimally populated rotamers) should fail to produce a viable solution. To test this assumption, we started with the fully refined LCB2 structure (8c3e, descendent from the AlphaFold3 model) and placed the Glu53 side chain into one of the following conformational states: pm0°, tm-20°, pt-20°, tp10° or mp0° (i.e. all possible rotameric states except those three that have been already sampled, cf. Fig. 4 ▸). The resulting models were further used to generate the electron density maps, as shown in Fig. 5 ▸.

  The inspection of Fig. 5 ▸ shows that one of the models, tm-20°, is more-or-less consistent with the electron density, whereas the remaining four, pm0°, pt-20°, tp10° and mp0°, clearly fail the test as shown by negative density (red mesh). This outcome is in agreement with our interpretation, i.e. those models that match the actual side-chain conformations are supported by the electron density analyses, while other models are inconsistent with their associated electron density maps and hence can be discarded. A summary of the crystallographic results is presented in Fig. 6 ▸(a). In this plot, the six electron-density-supported conformations from Fig. 4 ▸ are shown with red asterisks and, in addition, the electron-density-supported conformation tm-20° from Fig. 5 ▸ is shown with a red circle.

  To obtain further insight into the conformational dynamics of Glu53, we turn to MD simulations. In short, we used the six LCB2 structures obtained in this study to prepare six distinct models of the crystal unit cell (UC). Each UC model contained multiple protein molecules as well as intracrystalline solvent, which is explicitly represented by the optimal point charge (OPC) water (Izadi et al., 2014 ▸). For each UC model we then recorded a 1 µs MD trajectory using the Amber 2020 program (Case et al., 2020 ▸) with the ff19SB force field (Tian et al., 2020 ▸). To emulate the crystal lattice, periodic boundary conditions were applied to the unit-cell faces. The trajectories were recorded at 300 K in the isothermal–isobaric (NPT) ensemble using the Bussi–Parrinello velocity rescaling thermostat (Bussi et al., 2007 ▸) (see the supporting information for further details).

  In analyzing the MD data, we focused specifically on the conformation of the Glu53 side chain. Initially, each UC model featured its own Glu53 conformation, as illustrated in Fig. 4 ▸. However, as MD simulation progressed we observed Glu53 jumping from one rotameric state to another, eventually sampling a multitude of different conformations. The resulting rotamer distributions can be conveniently represented in the form of (χ1, χ2) heat maps; the third angle in the glutamate side chain, χ3, is only minimally restrained (Lovell et al., 2000 ▸). Since the Glu53 side chain is highly dynamic, all six MD trajectories lead to near-identical distributions, thus indicating good convergence of the simulations, see Fig. S6. One representative map is shown in Fig. 6 ▸(b) (corresponding to the simulation that was started from the crystal coordinates of 8c3e).

  Let us now review the results in Fig. 6 ▸. According to the MD data, there are three rotameric states that are sparsely populated (at the level of less than 1%): pm0°, pt-20° and mp0°. Indeed, none of these three rotameric states has been detected crystallographically, i.e. via electron density analyses. On the other hand, there are five rotameric states that are appreciably populated: tm-20°, mm-40°, tt 0°, mt-10° and tp10°. Four of these five states have been detected crystallographically. The sole exception is tp10°, which deserves a separate comment. According to the MD data, the population of this state reaches 65%. Note, however, that structural statistics reported by Lovell et al. suggest otherwise: on average, this conformational state is populated at the level of 6%, while specifically in α-helices it is populated at the level of 10% (Lovell et al., 2000 ▸). Therefore, one may assume that MD simulations exaggerate the population of the tp10° state, which would explain why this conformation is not registered in our crystallographic study.

  Moving beyond the Glu53 side chain, we assume that more generally multiple LCB2 structures obtained in this study can be viewed as an ensemble that is representative of the protein’s conformational dynamics. If so, then this six-member ensemble should give rise to lower values of Rwork/Rfree. Indeed, using the ensemble model comprising six LCB2 structures we arrive at the R factors of 0.187/0.220. This is significantly better than any of the structures taken alone; in fact, the best result from the individual structure is a good deal worse at 0.208/0.240 (see Table 2 ▸). Thus, we conclude that the collection of LCB2 structures obtained from the multi-start structure determination procedure as implemented in this work offers a useful (and in certain ways unique) representation of protein dynamics.


## Concluding remarks
  Fig. 7 ▸ illustrates, in a schematic form, the process of solving a protein’s crystallographic structure. The objective function in the plot is the measure of agreement between the experimental and calculated structure factors. In practice, this is usually the maximum likelihood function (Murshudov et al., 1997 ▸); alternatively, for the purpose of this discussion, it can be interpreted as the residual sum of squares or, otherwise, as the R factor. The generalized coordinate in the plot represents the complete set of atomic coordinates that defines the protein structure.

  Solving the structure or, in a more narrow sense, refining the structure entails minimization of the objective function over the space of atomic coordinates. The process begins with an imprecise initial model (solid circle) and ends with a highly accurate structure (open circle). Up to a certain point, the minimization lowers the value of the objective function, until finally it arrives at the bottom of the well, where the algorithm settles in one of the multiple local minima (within the gray band in Fig. 7 ▸).

  The multiple solutions are nearly identical, yet they differ from each other in certain subtle ways (e.g. with regard to conformations of certain side chains). Following DePristo, we argue that these solutions are equally valid (DePristo et al., 2004 ▸). Small variations in Rfree or other validation metrics are inconsequential and do not allow one to select the ‘best’ structure (cf. Table 2 ▸).

  The multiplicity of the closely related solutions (numerous local minima within the gray band in the plot) stems from two factors: (1) conformational variability of the protein structure, i.e. local dynamics, and (2) uncertainty that is present in the diffraction data, i.e. limited resolution (Terwilliger et al., 2007 ▸). The latter is itself mainly a consequence of dynamics, but also includes contributions from crystal defects, occasional radiation damage, finite accuracy of the X-ray detection system, approximate nature of the bulk solvent model etc. (Levin et al., 2007 ▸; Holton et al., 2014 ▸; Ma et al., 2015 ▸).

  It has long been recognized that using ensemble models instead of single-conformer models leads to somewhat better structural statistics. Broadly speaking, ensemble models can be generated by means of multi-copy optimization (Pellegrini et al., 1997 ▸) or otherwise multi-start optimization (Rice et al., 1998 ▸). The former approach involves simultaneous refinement of multiple protein copies, while the latter involves multiple (partially independent) refinement runs. It is believed that at higher crystallographic resolution ensemble models capture some of the actual conformational variability that is present in protein crystals and thus improve Rfree and other measures of structural quality. At lower resolution, ensemble models still produce slightly better Rfree values; in this case, the improvement is likely due to cancelation of small random errors associated with the individual solutions (similar to a standard procedure whereby the readouts from several repeat measurements are averaged to obtain a more accurate result).

  The treatment described in this paper can be considered an example of multi-start refinement, where six final structures derived from different MR models are grouped together to form a small multiconformer ensemble. Unlike most implementations of ensemble refinement that were fully automated, we solved the structures using a traditional (labor-intensive) approach involving manual manipulations in Coot. In doing so, we observed an interesting effect whereby several dynamic side chains produced a different electron density footprint depending on the prior model. Apparently, when we use a (highly refined) model where the side-chain conformation corresponds to a rotameric state that is significantly populated in the actual crystal, we thereby elicit the electron density for this particular side-chain conformation. Conversely, when we use a model with an irrelevant (low-population) side-chain conformation, it fails to produce the matching electron density.

  Strictly speaking, this behavior constitutes a case of model bias, i.e. certain details of the determined structure prove to be model dependent. We argue, however, that in the context of our study model bias plays a benign role, allowing us to characterize the rotameric distribution for the side chain at hand. Note that this would not be possible if we were to use standard tools for modeling of protein dynamics, such as alternative conformations.

  One may wonder if the same result can be achieved by using a number of distinct structures derived from a single MR model (relying on the element of randomness which is present in both Coot manipulations and Phenix random-seeded refinement). To test this conjecture, we repeated the process of structure determination beginning from the AlphaFold2-predicted MR model. Indeed, we found several side chains adopting different conformations in the two AlphaFold2-derived solutions. As before, when considering individual structures, the electron density did not show any evidence of conformational dynamics at these sites. It is only through the comparison of the two structures that the conformational disorder became directly visible.

  To further test the validity of rotameric distributions obtained for Glu53 and other dynamic side chains, we plan to use computer experiments (Levin et al., 2007 ▸; Terwilliger et al., 2007 ▸; van den Bedem et al., 2009 ▸; Liu et al., 2023 ▸). Specifically, we intend to simulate the diffraction data based on an MD trajectory of the LCB2 crystal and then use the simulated data to solve the protein structure using the same multi-start approach as described above. Comparison between the so-obtained multiconformer ensemble and the underlying MD model should directly confirm the interpretation presented in this work.

  In summary, we have used six different computer-generated MR models to obtain a multiconformer ensemble for the small antiviral protein LCB2. While Rwork/Rfree of the individual structures is at best 0.208/0.240, the six-member ensemble yields significantly improved values, 0.187/0.220. The procedure described in this paper potentially offers a new way to probe side-chain dynamics beyond the conventional electron density inspection. The proposed modeling scheme should add to the arsenal of methods that have been developed to glean information on protein dynamics from X-ray crystallography data.


## Related literature
  The following references are cited in the supporting information: Arbeitman et al. (2020 ▸); Atakisi et al. (2018 ▸); Berendsen et al. (1984 ▸); Dunlop et al. (2005 ▸); Essmann et al. (1995 ▸); Halle (2004 ▸); Hopkins et al. (2015 ▸); Jurrus et al. (2018 ▸); Kurauskas et al. (2017 ▸); Lebedenko et al. (2024 ▸); Poon (2010 ▸); Vonrhein et al. (2011 ▸); Webb & Sali (2016 ▸).


## Supplementary Material

## Data availability
  The LCB2 structure obtained from the AlphaFold3-generated model has been deposited in Protein Data Bank (PDB ID 8c3e). All six starting models, final structures and final electron density maps are available from the Zenodo repository, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15337018.


## Acknowledgements
  Experimental measurements were conducted using the facilities of the Center for X-ray Diffraction Studies, Center for Molecular and Cell Technologies, Thermogravimetric and Calorimetric Research Center and Magnetic Resonance Research Center in the Research Park of SPbU. We are thankful to Andrei Fokine, Alexander Golubev, Boris Kharkov, Pavel Korban, Alexandra Levkina, Dmitrii Luzik and especially Olga Lebedenko for their help and advice with different aspects of this work. We are also grateful to Yi Xue and Valentin Borshchevskiy for productive collaborations in the area of protein crystallography
